there's growing pressure to hold Israel
to account for its war on Gaza more
countries are referring it to the un's
top court and its president is facing a
criminal complaint Switzerland so can
International Justice stop Israel this
is Inside
Story
hello and welcome to the program I'm
Elizabeth panum it's been more than
three months since Israel launched its
devastating war on Gaza in the wake of
the 7th October attacks nearly 25,000
Palestinians have now been killed and
tens of thousands more injured but
Israel doesn't seem any closer to its
stated goal of eliminating Hamas and
freeing the captives while the
humanitarian catastrophe gets worse by
the day many countries have rejected
Israel's actions and South Africa has
taken it to the international court of
justice accusing it of committing
genocide Israel now appears more
isolated than ever its president Isaac
Herzog even became the subject of a
criminal complaint in Switzerland while
Mexico and Chile have referred Israel to
the international criminal court but
will any of this make a difference and
what can be done to end the Palestinians
suffering in Gaza we'll get to our
guests in a moment but first this report
from Paul Ging
Israel's war drags on in Gaza with food
and medical supplies nearly exhausted
the humanitarian condition has become
dire doctors are carrying out
amputations without any anesthetic with
growing outrage and perhaps crucially
legal proceedings ramping up the Israeli
president Isaac Herzog is facing a
criminal complaint in Switzerland it
happened during his recent trip to the
world economic Forum in Davos a
statement from Swiss prosecutors said
the plaintiffs are seeking a criminal
prosecution in parallel to a case
brought by South Africa at the
international court of justice accusing
Israel of genocide in
Gaza as the destruction escalates on the
ground Mexico and Chile have now
referred both Israel and Hamas to the
international criminal court citing
concerns about war crimes while the un's
icj concentrates on disputes between
countries the ICC is a criminal tribunal
which can prosecute the
individuals during herzog's appearance
in Davos he put forward Israel's
position on the war in Gaza while
rejecting charges of
genocide I'm not shying away from the
human tragedy in Gaza and you want to
know something we care we care we B it
it it it it is pain for us that our
neighbors are suffering so much but how
else can we defend ourselves in an
infrastructure of Terror of unbelievable
size and I call upon the entire
International Community to stand with
Israel and reject this
claim many countries around the world
have expressed concerns about the
disproportionality of Israel's war on
Gaza and the human
cost there are legal proceedings on more
than one front yet it's not clear what
effect this could have on Israel's
actions and what consequences there
could
be especially with allies like the
United States publicly stating their
unwavering
support Paul ging Al jazer for Inside
[Music]
Story let's bring in our guests in Paris
Lara alono an international lawyer and
human rights Advocate who co-host the
weekly podcast the Palestine pod in
Toronto William shabus professor of
international law at middlex University
in the UK he previously served as the
chairperson of the commission of inquiry
on the 2014 Gaza conflict and in Dublin
Jennifer Cassidy lecturer in diplomacy
and international law at the University
of Oxford and a former un and EU
Diplomat a very warm welcome to each of
you Mr shavis I'll start with you in
Toronto and start with that criminal
complaint against Israeli president pres
Isaac Herzog in Switzerland now I'm in
theory I know that third countries don't
have criminal jurisdiction over heads of
state government and the foreign
Ministers of any other countries but can
that immunity be lifted in certain
circumstances such as cases of alleged
crimes against
humanity not as international law stands
today there's quite a a a clear Judgment
of the international court of justice
from about 20 years ago that says that
the the national courts simply cannot
exercise jurisdiction uh in criminal
matters over a foreign head of state or
foreign minister so I think it's pretty
clear there and I think that's probably
the the uh the Fatal uh fact uh of the
complaint that was made against the
president of Israel in Switzerland a few
days ago okay Miss Cassidy there has
been a lot of activity in Western
countries recently using Universal
jurisdiction targeting people in Sudan
and Syria are these countries such as
Germany which found a Syrian konel
guilty of crimes against humanity in
20122 are they now Under Pressure to
treat Israeli officials in the same
way certainly there is as you rightly
noted a growing pressure um in quote
unquote Western countries um to to not
only respect international law but to
adhere to it and upholders and although
as was rightly mentioned by by the
previous panelists this is quite
difficult to do regarding the universal
jurisdiction specifically in this case
we must note that this is a serving uh
head of stage who has diplomatic
immunity it is not a post um you know
retired head of state it is a serving
member state so it's an extremely
difficult thing to Pro uh prosecute it's
difficult thing to to file however pre
as you rightly noted pressure is being
exerted H not by governments and not by
yes by some extent governments but the
political um Power is not backing a lot
of Western States it's the people um
around the world who are really actually
growing this movement and pressurizing
their states um and their legislators to
do this yeah absolutely from what we
know about this criminal complaint
against the Israeli president president
it has been brought by a number of
individuals uh Miss alboro do you think
that we will see Universal jurisdiction
being used against Israeli officials who
let's say unlike president Isaac Herzog
who don't have that immunity because
they're a head of state or head of
government or a foreign minister could
it make it difficult for them to move
around is that something that you see
happening well I absolutely agree that
we're going to continue to see more
legal action brought worldwide whether
it be in National courts um or continued
pressure on the international
institutions like the ICC and the icj um
to achieve some sort of accountability
um and I just want to say that whether
or not those cases are ultimately
successful whether or not they're
dismissed for jurisdictional or
procedural reasons or whether they
actually reach um a ruling on the merits
is almost not really the point every new
case which is brought in an effort to
hold Israel accountable um for their
genocidal Onslaught in Gaza is going to
add more pressure to changing the Status
Quo and this of course is not to be
viewed in isolation from all the forms
of resistance that we're seeing um In
This Moment worldwide including BDS
Grassroots efforts like direct action
and other efforts to hold elected
officials accountable um amongst others
so really I just want to emphasize that
the law is merely a tool um it's not
sufficient but it's also not meaningless
as some might think after Decades of um
understandable
frustration with it as a means for
achieving Justice and accountability yes
and we've certainly seen protests around
the world we have seen growing support
for the boycott divestment and sanctions
or BDS movement um if we can continue to
talk about what's happening legally Mr
shabus Mexico and Chile have referred
what's happening in Israel and Gaza to
the international criminal court and
Mexico has said that the ICC is the
proper Forum to establish criminal
potential criminal responsibility why do
you think that these countries think
that the ICC is a better Court to
investigate what's
happening well the ICC is a of course a
criminal court and it's going to focus
on individuals we were talking about the
the situation of the president of Israel
visiting Switzerland um according to the
case law of the international criminal
court he has no immunity there and so he
could be prosecuted and Switzerland
would be under an obligation to to bring
him to Justice to see that he would be
transferred to the ha arrested and so on
so there are some real advantages to the
criminal law route uh it's also
something that can operate more speedily
uh than for example the international
court of justice which is going to
probably in the next few days in the
next week or two deliver an order
against Israel but on the merits of the
case we're not going to have a ruling
for probably three four five years it's
another way of putting pressure and it's
very important what those states have
done because they are putting pressure
on the prosecutor of the Court the
prosecutor of the international criminal
court has been reluctant I think to
proceed uh with Israel and Palestine and
this is going to tighten the screws on
him and and and hopefully compel more uh
action on his part yeah Miss Cassie that
certainly been one accusation against
the ICC prosecutor kharim Khan isn't it
is that he favors is
charges over
longstanding uh Palestinian charges do
you how much pressure do you think um
Karim Khan is under as the chief
prosecutor of the international criminal
court a huge amount of pressure and
rightly so and I think your observations
regarding um the uh well also the global
observations that he's favoring the is
is Israeli side over the Palestinian
side because this we need to bear in
mind this is uh these advisory motions
also by the icj and other countries
regarding the illegal annexation of
territories what's happening in the West
Bank the changing status of Jerusalem
all these charges had been brought well
before you know October 7th and this has
never been looked into by the court but
he is and he should be experiencing a
lot of pressure and I think key point to
note that was noted Again by by the
previous panelist which we must pick up
on is the speediness at which the IC can
act because with the icj for example we
know that a genocidal ruling is going to
take years I myself worked on the Karu
tribunals in Cambodia and these took um
you know over decades for convictions of
genocide and crimes against humanity but
with the ICC we see a much speedier and
it's also not going to be brought to the
UN Security Council for a binding
resolution so that's the other key
distinction between the ICC and the icj
and Miss alboro why do you think that
the ICC has been slow as the criticism
goes to look at um the Grievances of
Palestinians and do you think that the
amount of pressure that is on the story
now because of Israel's war on Gaza that
that will that that will change the way
the ICC looks at this
case well I think part of the answer is
at least uh the political pressure that
the court has been under so remember
when the court announced uh the
prosecutor's office announced that they
would be investigating uh violations of
the Rome statute um that occurred in
Afghanistan and in Palestine uh around
2020 the US actually imposed sanctions
on the uh ICC the then prosecutor Fatu B
suda um and revoked her US Visa and so
there's at least that political IAL
element that's at play here um but I
think that really Kareem Khan needs to
act he could have issued a rest forence
months ago and we're seeing greater
criticism of how he's handling this
situation hundreds of Scholars and
practitioners of international law
submitted an open letter to the assembly
of State parties um regarding the office
of the prosecutor's engagement with this
case and this letter I encourage
everyone to read it raises questions
surrounding his impartiality
and his entire handling of this matter
so he really needs to move much quicker
than he has there hasn't even been an
update in terms of news on the IC
website with respect to the case in
Palestine since November and this is
really just unacceptable all right and
if we look now at what's happening at
the international court of justice as we
wait to hear if it's going to order
those provisional measures that South
Africa is asking for for the protection
of civilians in Gaza in Gaza Mr shabas
do you think that even before we have
any rulings do the does what's happening
in the court have the power to shape
events even separate from any rulings
you know we had the Israeli attorney
general said that she was going to
investigate statements that might
qualify as incitement to harm uninvolved
civilians a few days before the
hearings yes uh absolutely and I think
that the the the hearing that took place
a week ago in the ha had had great
Influence People heard the very very
compelling and Powerful uh argument set
out by South Africa this was of course
viewed around the world and I think the
rather pathetic efforts really by Israel
to respond to them so this is already
influential in putting that argument out
we've been certainly living in Western
countries as I do we've been bombarded
by media and so on there which are all
presenting which are which are tilting
very much to the Israeli side uh in the
debates and it was so important to to
have that access and to see that very
transparent and public debate where we
saw both arguments set out people can
judge based on it and and and so this is
very very influential already uh but of
course we need the order from the court
and and that's going to be a very
important development yeah Miss Cassidy
Mr shabus is saying that you know what
is happening in the court is really
influential it's exposed the deepening
Global divide though hasn't it we have
dozens of countries supporting South
Africa's case at the international court
of justice but they all happen to be
from the global South while many Western
countries are standing standing by
Israel do you think that the number of
countries that are supporting South
Africa's case does that put pressure on
Israel or does it not care as long as
the US and a number of you know a small
number of Western countries stand by
it well the personal part part of me
would like to say yes it puts pressure
on Israel but from all the the you know
from from the academic uh side of me all
the evidence and the statements points
towards um you your your latter response
that Israel simply does not care we know
the direct statement from um Netanyahu
who came out and said that if there was
a ruining of genocide or or of the
provisional measures um I believe the qu
was and may not be for basan but um we
do not care what he said that no one he
said that no one can stop them that the
no will stop yet not the Access of Evil
no one so yeah he Israel and once they
have the backing of the US um and also
the UK they have the the the funding now
they have the backing of Germany I don't
think any from from the barbaric actions
we've seen Israel commit in Gaza I do
not think um pressure by Western
governments that they're not even
regarding is going to have any play out
uh with them where we're going to see
the difference here uh is whether when
there's an icj ruling and it goes to the
UN Security Council will the US abide by
the legal arm of the UN or will they
still continue to um abstain on the
resolution or vote against it yeah and
and and Miss alboro what do you think
you know if the icj does order the
provisional measures that South Africa
is asking for how much pressure does
that put on the United States on
Israel's biggest Ally to abide by what
the un's top court is
saying well I think it will put the US
in a difficult place because if they
ignore the ruling and uh you know that
there's a plausible case for for
genocide which is what the court is
being asked um right now that there's a
plausible case that Israel has violated
the genocide convention um then it'll
put the US in a really difficult
position because do they really want to
continue to provide um unlimited and
unconditional financial and military aid
to Israel and thereby actually violate
in a sense um that order um because that
will only undermine the court itself and
does the does the US really want to
undermine the highest you know judicial
organ in the world I think it will um
put the US in a difficult position
obviously it will make it much more
difficult for the US to lecture anybody
worldwide about human rights and their
own behavior and it will just expose
even further that the US operates
according to double standards and
hypocrisy and not in accordance with the
legal framework um established after
World War II to prevent and sanction
Mass
atrocities uh Mr shabus a lot is of
course known and made of the US support
for Israel but I want to talk about
Germany's intervention at the
international court of justice Germany
has a very interesting history doesn't
it it committed the first genocide of
the 20th century against Namibia it of
course committed genocide against the
Jews and the Holocaust and yet it
supported the gambia's case against
Myanmar it supports Ukraine's case
against Russia and this time it is
intervening on behalf of Israel what do
you make of this and do you think that
it could Germany's history could it help
or hinder Israel's
case I don't know I really appreciated
the statement from the president of
Namibia who who basically said to the
Germans you know you should keep your
mouth shut when you start getting
involved in denying genocide it's not a
good look for that country but you know
the the this is the the beauty of these
remedies before the international court
of justice and the international
criminal court I'm I'm I'm not sure that
they really uh have much influence on
the United States that was your previous
question but I think that they do put a
lot of pressure
on some of many of the middle Powers who
are very close to Israel and very
supportive Germany among them perhaps
first and foremost but other countries
uh the Netherlands Belgium France Canada
where I am coming from today um and
these countries are all very loyal to
Israel but they're also very loyal to
the international court of justice and
to the international criminal court so
taking a a battle there so to speak puts
them in a very very difficult and
uncomfortable place especially when you
have someone like the prime minister of
Israel uh basically being totally
dismissive of the international uh court
of justice and of course they'll say the
same about the international the
international criminal court just to
give you an example uh a few months ago
Canada the Netherlands Germany France
made a submission to the international
uh court of justice in the case that's
been filed against Myanmar and they
proposed a very expansive understanding
of the crime of genocide um this of
course is going to be very helpful in
terms of fighting against Myanmar in the
case but it's also going to be very
helpful to South Africa I think that
probably the lawyers in those countries
those European countries in Canada who
prepared that are now regretting that
they took that initiative but it it
brings up the double standards this is
the beauty of the court is that it's a
place where you can to some extent I
don't want to say there are no double
standards there either but you can cut
through them and you can expose them and
and that's the interest in these
remedies absolutely and Miss Cassidy how
much do you think I mean we have been
talking about it already but just how
much has Israel's war on Gaza have the
divides expose the double standards of
the US of Europe when they openly and
time and time again condemn say Russia's
actions in Ukraine and stand by Israel
how much longer do you think they can do
that without realizing how it
looks yes well it has uh there has been
many moments uh in the past decades that
have exposed the double standards um of
the West when it comes to war crimes and
when it comes to their um quote unquote
attempt to spread democracy um around
the
world I think we are I The Optimist in
me thinks we are at somewhat of a BRI
Breaking Point um on this issue because
we have my area of expertise is social
media and realtime governance we've
never had a war which we have as you
know a global Society been able to see
these atrocities before our eyes so I
think the people and we've seen the
reaction of the world you know we've
seen uh people marching in their
Millions if not billions of countries of
you know every nationality in every
region so I think we are are at at as a
breaking point but you know turning
directly back to back to your question
the
hypocrisy is so strong and and as was
noted earlier if the US rejects the
icj's even provisional measures you know
they've already lost credibility in my
opinion to lecture along with the UK to
lecture people on upholding
international human rights but this will
really
this the lus test yeah Miss alboro let
me come to you with a people who didn't
have the benefit of social media the
people who survived the Bosnian War
1,000 survivors of the war have written
a letter to the international court of
justice saying that you know if the
court had acted um earlier then it would
have prevented a genocide and war crimes
there do you think that what happened in
Bosnia what happened in Rwanda that
these things that the international
court of justice that these are things
that they will be thinking about I would
certainly hope so in fact even South
Africa's Advocate uh during the oral
argument said very clearly to the court
that the court actually failed those
people um who had uh experienced
genocide um and failed to deliver them
Justice and so called on the court to
act before it's too late in this
instance and not to fail the Palestinian
people and some might say that actually
that's already taken place and that
there's really in a sense no justice you
know that can be attained from this
point on because where do you go um
after already 30,000 people have been
killed in three months and you know Gaza
is creating you know and breaking new
records every day in terms of
Destruction and human suffering it seems
like every time I check my phone I'm
seeing some sort of a new superlative
being used to describe the situation in
Gaza so I would hope that the court will
take that into account um and and
recognize that they have a tremendous
responsibility here not to fail another
people South which is what South Africa
underlined many times to the court Mr
shabus despite the international court
of justice in 1993 ordering provisional
measures um in the Bosnian War we know
what happened in 1995 that Bosnian serbs
systematically murdered 8,000 Bosnian
Muslims that's despite that provisional
order that was in place so will anything
short of a complete ceasefire now help
the people of Gaza well anything is
going to help them but I totally agree
we need a complete ceasefire and I I
hope that the international court of
justice has the wisdom to do that
everything points to the fact that um
regardless of how strong the claim is
about genocide Israel has shown itself
to be incapable of distinguishing
between civilians and Military
objectives and so is itable of is it
incapable of distinguishing or does it
make the distinction and go ahead
anyway well perhaps I mean there are two
ways to look at this one is that it's
incapable of distinguishing or the other
is that it's essentially directing a war
against the civilians of Gaza uh that's
becoming also increasingly apparent that
it's it's actually trying to drive the
people of Gaza either out of the country
entirely out of their their home uh I
mean their new home because they are
refugees in Gaza to begin with but but
that that this is the real objective not
to destroy Hamas as they say not to
rescue the hostage which they're
incapable of doing but rather to attack
the the people of Gaza so hopefully the
international court of justice will
appreciate that and will make an order
against Israel now you raised the
question will Israel follow that that's
the other problem and there's no
meaningful way of enforcing this uh
except that if there is such an order it
is going to really turn the screws on
some of Israel's allies although as I
say I don't think that the United States
is going to be uh persuaded at all you
have to remember that the first the
decision by the international court of
justice on The Binding nature of
provisional measures was directed
against the United States because they
refused to themselves uh respect
provisional measures of the court in in
a case more than 20 years ago all right
I'm afraid that we have run out of time
but I want to thank all of our guests
for this insightful discussion that is
Lara alono in Paris William shavas in
Toronto and Jennifer Cassidy in Dublin
and thank you too for watching you can
see the program again anytime by
visiting our website
al.com and for further discussion do go
to our Facebook page that's
facebook.com/ AJ insidestory you can
also join the conversation on X our
handle is at AJ inside story from me
Elizabeth panum and the entire team here
in Doha bye for
[Music]
now
make sure to subscribe to our channel to
get the latest news from Al
jazer